<strong>Persistence</strong> is the hardest problem to solve for a MMO. Fortunately for us there has been ten plus years of solving this problem. In this article we'll take a look at storage solutions and persistence methods.<br /><br /> The two base "storage solutions" are: <ul><li><strong>Memory</strong></li> <li><strong>Files</strong></li> </ul><br /> You may be surprised that I included <strong>memory </strong>here (as memory is volatile), but <strong>Persistence</strong> includes any data that the Simulation and Presentation can retrieve and is not presently aware of.  <br /><br /> For Example: <br /><br /> My <strong>Simulation</strong> currently is serving five players but the MMO has had ten players logged into it. Somewhere on the same server in <strong>memory </strong>there is a list of all ten players with their information. As you can see the <strong>memory</strong> in this case is acting as the Persistence.&nbsp;<div>&nbsp;<br /><div><strong>Memory</strong>&nbsp;<strong>Persistence</strong> is  relatively easy to implement and &nbsp;super fast; of course there are draw backs as well. What would happen when the example crashed? <b>Poof</b> All the data is gone. There are also hard constraints on the amount of memory available on a single computer.  <br /><br /><strong> File storage</strong> is straight forward as well. You simply read and write to nonvolatile files. This obviously has the huge benefit of keeping data around even after a crash or two. This of course comes with a massive speed penalty as opening/reading/writing/maintaining files destroys your disk I/O (your hard drive can only write/read so fast). It also becomes pretty unwieldy FAST.  <br /><br /> So both of these have MAJOR drawbacks that would make implementing <strong>Persistence</strong> with a single solution impossible. So how do MMOs not only keep your data around forever but serve it up for thousands of users instantly?(pray the memory server doesn't crash) what? NO! <br /><br /> The answer is simple: <strong>Combine Them.</strong> <br /><br /> Many of you are familiar with <strong>Databases</strong> and all these mystical things are a glorified file structure that heavily utilize memory to speed things up considerably. Of course <strong>databases</strong> still have drawbacks. They require an immense amount of configuration and generally are not well suited to MMOs; who write way more than they read due to the <strong>Simulation</strong> having much of the data readily available already. You can generally think of<strong> databases</strong> as more <strong>file</strong> than <strong>memory</strong>. <br /><br /> Example databases: <ul><li><strong>MySQL</strong></li> <li><strong>MS SQL</strong></li> <li><strong>Oracle</strong></li> <li><strong>Postgresql</strong></li> </ul><br /> So if <strong>databases</strong> are ill suited then what is?  <br /><br /><strong> Datastores</strong> (memory database) keep the majority of data in memory and only write to files to backup in case of restart or crash.<strong> Datastores</strong> are extraordinarily fast and are well suited to MMOs. They are not without their cons as well though. <strong>Datastores</strong> generally have to load a considerable amount of data into memory at startup, they are more susceptible to hardware failures (bad ram arggg), and off the shelf solutions all universally suck.(looking at you memory tables) <br /><br /> Example Datastores:<div><ul><li><strong>&nbsp;Google Datastore (awesome)</strong></li><li><strong>&nbsp;Cryptic Studio's Object DB&nbsp;</strong></li></ul></div><p>So now that we know a little about the <strong>storage solutions</strong>, how and when do we backup?</p><p>There are two paradigms of thought:</p><p>&nbsp;</p><ul><li><strong>On Change</strong></li><li><strong>Set Intervals</strong></li></ul><div>Much like the <strong>storage solutions </strong>&nbsp;these two are often combined where important changes (such as leveling up) are immediately stored while others(like number of kills) can be stored at set intervals. &nbsp;&nbsp;</div><br /><br /><br /><br />

<h6>

<span> Next up on Th<span><span>e MCP: Presentation</span><span> (or how I need a better name for this component)&nbsp;</span></span></span>

</h6>

</div></div>